## Prediction-of-NOx-levels

# Summary:
In this project, the primary objective is to develop a statistical model for predicting flue gas emissions, namely Nitrogen Oxides (NOx), based on data collected in a power plant located in Turkey's Northwestern region through sensors aggregated over an hour and understand the impact on NOx levels due to the remaining nine variables.

Correlation plot inference states strong collinearity between predicting variables as well as with response variable. After fitting the linear model, it is found that only AT, AP, CDP, and TEY are significant parameters but showed a high variation inflation factor (heteroscedasticity). A complete second-order model is developed consisting of 55 variables reduced to 21 variable models by grouping highly correlated variables in a group and using one variable from each group as a prediction variable. A second-order multiple variable regression model is fitted using 11 predictors which had the least MSE of 8.22.

Subsequently, variable selection models are used for the Selection of variables out of 21 variable models. The main criteria for model selection were AIC, BIC, Adjusted R2, and MSE, with 10-fold cross-validation performed. Regularization techniques are applied to the second-order Model. PCR model with 20 variables yields an MSE of 9.66. Decision tree methods were also used with the expectation of increased accuracy on the cost of reduced interpretability. However, the results obtained are different; MSE for bagging and the random forest is significantly high compared to Gradient boosting MSE of 9.66.

After further analysis, it is found that the Multiple Variable regression model is the best in terms of accuracy, followed by Model develop on forward Selection, PCR and Gradient boosting. However, if interpretability is preferred over accuracy, the backward selection model is the best as it uses the lowest predictors (9).

# Data: 
To predict the NOx levels and their association with the sensor metrics, observational data was amassed and aggregated from a gas turbine located in Turkey's northwestern region for nitrogen oxide and nitrogen dioxide (NO+NO2). The dataset includes 257 observations for 10 variables, of which one is the response: Nitrogen Oxides - NOx (mg/m3) and the remaining predictors are Ambient temperature AT ( ̊C), Ambient pressure AP (mbar), Ambient humidity AH (%), Air filter difference pressure AFDP (mbar), Gas turbine exhaust pressure GTEP (mbar), Turbine inlet temperature TIT ( ̊C), Turbine after temperature TAT ( ̊C), Compressor discharge pressure CDP (mbar), Turbine inlet temperature TEY (MWH).

The dataset provided is pre-processed and does not contain any missing value, and is readily available for analysis, so no additional preprocessing is required. If we look at the data set's correlation plot, we observe that seven out of nine predictors negatively correlate with the response variable (i.e., NOx). This means if the value of predictors increases, we should observe a decrease in the value of response only. Ambient pressure (AP) and Ambient humidity (AH) have a positive correlation with NOx. Furthermore, we also noticed that many predictor variables have collinearity with each other, with maximum collinearity of 0.99 between Compressor discharge pressure (CDP) and Turbine energy yield (TEY). Keeping this collinearity structure in mind, it is good to try interaction terms for analysis as interaction terms may have a high correlation or impact with response variables (NOx).

Total number of variables after creating second order model with interaitions are 55, but many variable have very high correlation with each other, resulting in hetergeneity. So to tackle problem of collinearity and heterogeneity we used simple approach of combining all variables that have correlinearity greater than |0.8| and using one variable from each group to represent the group. 


# Models:
Different models are used for deciding best model for given data set. Models used are Multivariate Regression Model, Principle Component Regression and Decision trees. To select variables in regression models Variable selection techniques are applied also regularization techniques are used. In decision tree model along with simple tree, bagging, random forest and gradient boosting were also employed. 
